This research titled ‘Optimal Sustainable Multimodal Freight Transport and Logistics System Management in Ghana’ aims at finding an optimized freight shipment system in Ghana hinterland. It originated from the inefficiencies in the existing freight transport system that cause economic, social and environmental problems. The principal cause is the over-dependent on unimodal road in freight shipment resulting into vehicular traffic congestion, accident, high road maintenance and fuel costs and environmental pollutions. Mixed methodology approach consisting of qualitative and quantitative techniques were applied to arrive at a significant outcomes. Varied stakeholders (comprising government agencies and policy makers, transport and port managers. city authorities and planners, manufacturers and academicians) were consulted for their inputs in achieving an integrated transport and logistics system that could not only save cost in freight shipments but also serve overall national socio-economic and environmental benefits. The general aim of the research is to assess the existing freight transport system and optimize a sustainable multimodal transport and logistics system, and thereby propose pragmatic strategies for the implementation of desirable institutional policies for the operationalization of the optimized system that could address economic, social and environmental issues.
The study reviewed wide-range of related concepts from developed to developing economies and concentrated on that of Ghanaian transport system. Among the themes are sustainability, multimodality, intermodal transport system, Container transport and logistics system, Optimization models for intermodal transport, Intermodal service networks design, approaches for intermodality and Logistics management systems, Status quo of Intermodal system in developing countries, Challenges and constraints of ITS, Review of Ghana transport system, and the Management of MTS and Logistics responsiveness.
In pursuing the research objectives, the study adopted multiplicity of qualitative and quantitative tools, techniques and methodologies before arriving at pragmatic and feasible solutions. Interview was conducted, questionnaire was administered and SPSS Technique was used for the Analysis of the primary and secondary information obtained from seasoned practitioners, experts and stakeholders. Extensive Literature review and survey methodologies were applied for the evaluation of the sustainable intermodal freight transport system in Ghana and other developing countries. Ordinal Logistics regression was useful for assessing the influence of MTS dynamics on logistics responsiveness. The Factor analysis technique was utilized to evaluate the impact of MTS on City logistics performances and proposed realistic MTS strategies addressing city logistics and transport management challenges.  Structural equation modeling was functional in analyzing and modeling the existing system of import and export containerized freight and logistics system demands with regards to service providers, government agencies and customers’ requirements. The Shortest path algorithm (Dijkstra’s Algorithm) and four different Forecasting methods (Linear, smoothing average, exponential and grey methods) were some of the applicable instruments to obtain the data for the Optimal SMTLSM model. Optimization process was applied to enhance the existing freight transport system in achieving total evaluated cost savings. Principally this considered (time, distance (route) and carbon emission), and the three transport modes (road, rail and waterway) that constituted the multimodal system. Finally, pragmatic strategies and institutional policies were proposed for stakeholders’ implementation. It was evident that the existing road dominant transport system could not handle the expanding freight shipment demands and needed developed system for sustainability. Hence the move for Multimodal transport system that integrate and strengthen more environmental friendly transport modes (waterway, rail) to complement road became apparently useful for in-depth research project of this kind. The optimized system result indicated a cost savings of 4.5% for the total containerized cargos. A devastating concern was the existence of fewer trains and barges and their infrastructure. Therefore, it was suggested that building rail and barge infrastructure would inevitably reduce shipments cost. Other rational measures for sustainable freight movements in Ghana were also recommended accordingly. 
